Last week, we introduced the theme for 2024, continue.
I preached a message really from 2 Timothy 3 in verse 14
and a theme message, kind of an overview of the entire year.
And this morning we'll begin in 1 Timothy chapter number one
by God's grace and with God's help
throughout this calendar year on Sunday mornings,
we will study through 1 and 2 Timothy.
And I look forward to the opportunity
to be able to go through both of these letters.
And we understand that the exhortation to continue
is an important one.
And throughout this calendar year,
we will regularly hear the thought,
the exhortation, the encouragement,
we'll hear the word continue.
And you'll see it on the banners each week that you come,
it'll be on your calendars, bookmarks, sermon notebooks,
just this thought of continue.
I would say this morning that understanding the charge
and really even accepting the call to continue
is important.
It's an important step for every believer
to understand the charge and then to accept the call.
However, it's simply not enough.
It's not enough to simply understand
that we have been exhorted to continue.
It's simply not enough to even say, I'm going to continue.
I find this morning that there's little doubt in my mind
that there are believers that have understood the charge.
There are believers that have even at one point in their life
accepted the call, but somewhere along the line,
they got derailed.
They got detoured, distracted.
They just simply aren't continuing.
And we find that as we look at this portion,
as we enter into the first few verses of 1 Timothy,
chapter number one,
I believe this morning that the Lord gives us
two fundamental truths.
These fundamental truths that God gives us
in 1 Timothy one, one through four
are essential for every child of God to believe,
to understand.
I believe this morning that these two truths
will enable us to continue.
I've titled the message this morning equipped to continue.
Equipped to continue.
It's not enough to simply understand the charge.
It's not enough to even accept the call.
We must be equipped to continue.
There are people no doubt in a variety of phases of life
that we could speak of a variety of areas
where people have desired to continue on
and they desired, they understood the importance,
but they simply didn't have the resources.
They were not equipped to go another step.
I'd like to tell you this morning
that we find that our equipping comes from God.
And how blessed we are to have these few introductory verses
to the book of 1 Timothy and understand how Timothy
is given this truth from Paul
under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit of God.
And as Paul is giving, communicating this truth
to his son in the faith, Timothy,
really in the very beginning of this book,
we find that Timothy is being equipped
to continue, he's being equipped.
As we look at the passage of scripture,
there's just two fundamental truths,
but look in verse number one, as we read the text
and dig into the message this morning,
the Bible says Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ
by the commandment of God, our savior
and Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope.
Under Timothy, my own son of the faith,
grace, mercy, and peace from God, our father
and Jesus Christ, our Lord.
As I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus
when I went into Macedonia,
that thou mightest charge some
that they teach no other doctrine,
neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies,
which minister questions rather than godly edifying,
which is in faith, so do.
As I look at the beginning of verse number three
and the end of verse number four,
and then we begin to put the meat on the bones,
if you will, for the message this morning,
we find that in verse number three,
Paul says, I besought thee notice to abide still at Ephesus.
That word abide literally means to continue with
or to continue in.
It means to remain or to stay or tarry.
And then he says at the end of verse number four,
I've besought thee at the beginning of verse number three
to abide still at Ephesus.
At the end of verse number four, two words, so do.
So do.
But how do I continue?
I understand the importance of continuing.
I understand I've accepted the call to continue,
but I must, you must, we must be equipped to continue.
As we look at this portion of scripture,
again, God gives us two fundamental truths
that I believe will help every child of God.
Number one, if you're taking notes this morning,
we must first understand the provision of God.
We must understand the provision of God.
In order for you to continue, in order for me to continue,
we must understand that it is God who provides us
with all that we need so that we can continue.
We must understand that it's not in your strength,
it's not in my strength to be able to continue.
No, it's through his enabling, he equips us.
It is his provision.
As we look at these first couple of verses,
we understand that Paul is communicating
that very truth to Timothy.
Notice, he says in verse number one,
Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ,
by the commandment of God, notice our Savior first,
when we consider the provision of God,
we must understand that it is God that is our Savior.
I'm thankful that there's no other Savior.
He is the only Savior,
and we understand his place of being our Savior.
I'm thankful this morning that he saved my soul.
26, 26 and a half years ago,
he saved me by his amazing grace,
and I'm so thankful that he is my Savior.
He is my Lord, and we find this morning
that we think about that truth and that word
that Paul says, speaking of God being our Savior,
it is God who has provided us with salvation,
this wonderful gift that is only available
through the Lord Jesus Christ,
and that in itself is what has enlisted us
into this fight that we're encouraged
and exhorted to continue.
He's our Savior.
We must never forget.
We must never get over the blessed truth
that God is my Savior.
He's the only Savior.
He's the only one,
and I'm thankful that he's my Savior,
but as we look at the text of Scripture,
we find that he mentions about God being our Savior,
but notice it says at the end of verse number one,
and Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope.
See, he doesn't simply give hope, he is my hope.
We find that the psalmist says,
you don't need to turn there, I'll read it to you quickly,
but in Psalm 71 and verse number five,
I preached a message on this thought
on a Wednesday evening several months ago,
but the Bible says in Psalm 71 and verse five,
for thou art my hope, O Lord God,
thou art my trust from my youth,
and we understand that God,
he doesn't simply give us hope, though he does,
but he is our hope.
We understand that this word hope
is a word that is so unique biblically.
It's used so different,
the context of the word is used so different
in our society today, in our language today,
in our interactions with people,
we talk about hope, and we use the word really
as some wishful kind of thinking,
but we understand that the word hope biblically is unique,
and the fact that it carries with it
the idea of a confident expectancy,
the idea that he is our confidence,
that everything that he has said is true,
and that he is faithful, and he will do, he is my hope.
You think about the songs that we sang this morning,
when we all get to heaven, why do we sing that song?
Because he's our hope, and he's told us
that he's reserved, he's got a place for us,
he is giving us, he's preparing that mansion for us,
and we sang that song as well this morning,
that second song that we sang,
and you think about the truth this morning
that God is our hope.
We find that as we come to verse number two,
he tells us, it's Paul that's writing,
and he's writing to Timothy,
God has providentially preserved this for us today,
but he says unto Timothy, my own son in the faith,
and notice the third aspect of the provision of God,
he says grace, mercy, and peace
from God our Father and Jesus Christ our Lord,
and so we see the three elements that are mentioned
in verse number two, first he speaks about grace,
I'm so thankful for God's amazing grace,
I'm thankful that his grace is abundant,
I'm thankful that his grace has been extended to us,
I'm thankful that our God is gracious,
when we think about grace, we think of it,
and we understand the Bible speaks of grace
in two distinct areas, he speaks of saving grace,
for by grace are you saved through faith,
I'm thankful for God's grace, his saving grace,
but we understand that God doesn't only speak of grace
in the sense of saving grace,
but he also speaks of grace as serving grace,
or his enabling, and we find that really,
as we look at the context of what Paul is dealing with,
and thinking about being equipped to continue,
and understanding the provision of God,
we understand this morning that we're saved by grace,
but then we understand that God gives us grace
each and every day, I'm thankful that in
2 Corinthians chapter 12, that God,
as Paul is sharing.
that testimony about the trial and trouble
that he's dealing with, and God says,
no, I'm not going to remove this thing from you.
But God says, my grace is sufficient for thee.
And I understand this morning that God's grace is sufficient.
Notice what Paul says in 1 Corinthians 15,
speaking of this grace, this serving grace,
or this enabling grace.
Notice in 1 Corinthians 15, Paul speaks of this grace.
Again, we see, obviously, the element of saving grace,
and we're saved by grace.
We see the enabling that God gives to his children,
and we find that here in 1 Corinthians 15, in verse 9,
notice what Paul says.
I am the least of the apostles that
am not meet to be called an apostle,
because I persecuted the church of God.
But by the grace of God, I am what I am.
And notice, and his grace, which was bestowed upon me,
was not in vain.
But I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I,
but the grace of God, which was with me.
Therefore, whether it were I or they, so we preach,
and so ye believed.
Peter adds this in 1 Peter chapter 4.
When you think about the truth of God's grace
and his enabling, and we consider
the provision of God, how is it that I'm
going to be equipped to continue?
Well, because God is my Savior, and he's never
going to leave me nor forsake me.
We find that we're secure in the hand of God.
We find that he, listen, I am his, and he is mine.
And what a blessed truth.
I find this morning that as I'm seeking
to be equipped to continue the understanding,
the provision of God, that he's my hope,
but he also gives grace.
He gives grace.
In 1 Peter 4 and verse number 10,
the Bible says, as every man hath received the gift,
even so minister to the same one to another
as good stewards of the manifold grace of God.
God is the one who gives grace.
And by the way, you're going to need God's grace
if you're going to continue.
You're going to need God's grace.
You're going to have to understand that he is the source.
He is the one that gives.
Notice what Paul says again in 1 Timothy 1 and verse number 2
as he's writing and he's speaking
about the provision of God.
He says unto Timothy, my own son of the faith,
grace, mercy, and peace from God our father
and Jesus Christ our Lord.
He is the source.
He is the one who gives us that grace.
No doubt you've had some interaction in your life before
where you've said to somebody,
would you just be gracious with me?
Maybe you've said, would you show me some mercy?
And we'll see mercy here in just a moment.
But I'm thankful this morning that God's grace
has been given and he gives us the grace that we need
in order to continue.
He speaks of mercy here as the second element
in verse number two.
He says grace, and so we find that he, our God,
he gives grace, he gives mercy.
Understand this morning that the reason
that God gives us grace and the reason that he gives us mercy
is because he's gracious, because he's merciful.
It flows out of who he is.
And if you're going to continue,
if you're going to be equipped to continue,
you need to understand the provision of God
and you need to understand that he's going to give you
the grace, he's going to give you the mercy.
Have you ever heard, maybe you've said something like this
in your life before, I just can't go another day.
I can't do it anymore.
I give up.
Listen, don't turn your back on God
because God's grace and God's mercy.
And the third element in verse number two is peace.
Oh, you think about the thought of continue,
the charge, the exhortation.
And we find that, man, we're going to need peace
in the midst of great turmoil,
in the midst of great difficulty and opposition
and all that will take place.
We need peace.
Listen, you cannot manufacture peace.
But I'm thankful that I know the Prince of Peace.
Amen.
I'm thankful that he gives peace, that he is the source.
Notice what John says in John 14.
Jesus is speaking, John records it for us,
but notice what Jesus says in John 14.
I love this verse of scripture
and I love the way that Jesus communicates to his disciples
who he's just shared with them once again,
the fact that he's going to be going to Calvary,
he's going to give his life on the cross
and their hearts are troubled,
but he tells them not to have troubled hearts.
In John 14 and verse number 27, notice he says,
peace I leave with you.
Then notice this word, my peace I give unto you.
Then he gives further explanation,
not as the world giveth, give I unto you.
Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid.
Oh, I'm so thankful that God is the Prince of Peace
and I'm so thankful that he has given to us peace.
We find here that Jesus would say
that I'm giving you this peace.
It's interesting that we find that the Bible
gives us this truth of having the peace of God
in Philippians chapter four and verse number seven,
that passeth all understanding.
This morning, if we are going to be equipped to continue,
if we're going to take this theme for 2024
and we're going to hear the exhortation
and we're going to study and see how Paul is encouraging
and exhorting Timothy to continue to abide still at Ephesus
as he uses that term in verse number three,
to continue as he tells them in second Timothy four,
as we studied last week,
in the midst of all of the opposition and the difficulty
in those times that are described
in second Timothy chapter number three, perilous times,
these days in which evil men and seducers
shall wax worse and worse.
The single word is continue.
I understand the charge.
I accept the call, but I must be equipped.
And it's God who does the equipping.
It is God who gives us and enables us.
He gives us all that we need.
And that's a precious truth of the Bible.
He's given us all things
that pertain unto life and godliness.
We find that the truth of God's word
that is revealed to us here in this opening statement
as Paul would write to his son in the faith,
that here in the midst of this adversity,
in the midst of what Timothy would deal with,
Paul reminds Timothy that God has equipped you.
He's your savior.
He's your hope.
He gives grace.
He gives mercy and he gives peace.
Oh, I believe this morning
that when we understand the provision of God,
it helps us to recognize
that God has equipped us to continue.
Why? Because it's not within you
and it's not within me.
You ever read an account of someone's life?
Maybe a Bible character,
and we read of certain hardships
and difficulties that they endured,
and we say, how in the world
did they continue through that?
Maybe you've read of some modern missionary
or servant of the Lord who faced great adversity,
yet they continued to follow the Lord.
They continued in the midst of great persecution
to do what God called them to do.
And you say, what is it about them?
It's not anything about them.
It's about God in them.
It's about what God has given them.
So often people will say of the apostle Paul,
oh, I want to be like Paul.
No, I want the Lord to use me
in the same manner in which God used Paul,
but understand that Paul was surrendered to the Lord.
Paul was open to God working in his life,
and Paul understood that it was God
who equipped him to continue
even in the midst of great adversity.
It was God's provision.
It is God who is the source of these wonderful truths
that he gives us in verse one and two.
If we're gonna be equipped to continue,
we must first understand the provision of God.
But number two this morning,
we must understand the plan of God.
Let's understand the plan of God.
I'm thankful this morning that God has a plan.
Aren't you?
You say, well, I have a plan too.
Can I tell you this morning that God's plan is better?
Amen?
You say, no, no, Pastor, I worked on this plan,
and I mean, it's just perfect.
It's the best plan ever.
Listen, God's plan is better.
And you know what you ought to be willing to do
with your plan?
You ought to be willing to let God rewrite it
if he desires to do so.
Amen?
We ought to be willing to let God,
if we could use the imagery this morning
to take our plan and ball it up and throw it in the trash
and say, here's my plan, and my plan is better.
Because God's ways are always best.
We, in fact, sing the song,
it's best that we let him have his way with us.
And this morning, when we understand the plan of God,
we see that Paul actually shares with us
the fact that he reveals in verse number one
that he understood God's plan for his own life.
And then he would speak about Timothy
and we'll focus more on Timothy than we will on Paul.
But notice in verse number one,
that Paul, as he begins writing to Timothy,
he says, Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ.
So Paul understood that God's plan for his life
was that he was an apostle.
He was an apostle of Jesus Christ.
Notice, though, what the Bible says in verse number one,
as it continues, it says,
by the commandment of God, by the commandment of God.
Now, hold your place here in 1 Timothy 1
and turn to 2 Timothy 1.
And I wanted to see what Paul says
as he's writing this second letter,
again, under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit of God.
This isn't just, these aren't Paul's words.
These are God's words, amen?
In fact, in 2 Timothy 3, he will tell us
all scriptures given by inspiration of God.
God breathed.
And so we find that these are God's words.
He says in 1 Timothy 1.1
that I'm an apostle of Jesus Christ
by the commandment of God.
In 2 Timothy 1 and verse number one,
it says Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ.
Do you see what it says?
By the will of God.
Now, is it the commandment of God
or is it the will of God?
Yes.
Why?
Because God's will for your life
should be viewed as God's command for your life.
Amen?
And God's command for your life
should be viewed as God's will for your life.
The reality is that there's no discrepancy
between what Paul says in 1 Timothy 1.1
and 2 Timothy 1.1.
It is the will of God
that he is an apostle of Jesus Christ.
It is the command of God
that he's an apostle of Jesus Christ.
And when Paul understood the plan of God for his life,
it enabled him to continue through great adversity.
You wanna look at a man's life who faced great adversity,
who faced opposition at every turn?
Study the life of Paul.
Everywhere he went, he was met with opposition
and with adversity, yet he continued.
Why?
Because he understood the provision of God,
but he also understood the plan of God.
He understood that it was God's will,
it was God's command for his life
that he was an apostle of Jesus Christ.
And we find there's many other things
that he would share throughout the scriptures
that we don't have time this morning to deal with
as to what that office of being an apostle
detailed and contained with regard to the outworking of it.
But we find that God's will
for the life of the apostle Paul
was viewed as a command, not as an option.
See, sometimes what happens in the life of believers today
is we say, well, God, tell me what you want me to do,
and then I'll kind of evaluate that
and see if it kind of matches what I think I want to do.
Are we bought with a price or not?
We're not our own.
We've been bought with a price.
And God's will is God's command,
and God's command is God's will.
Paul understood the plan of God for his life,
but then we find as we look here
in 1 Timothy chapter number one
that Paul reminds Timothy of God's plan for his life.
Notice as Paul is writing to Timothy
in verses three and four,
as we leave the thought of the provision of God
and look, focus on the plan of God and understanding it,
we find that Paul would remind Timothy
of what God's plan was for the life of Timothy.
Notice in verse number three, he says,
as I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus.
I've mentioned already by way of introduction
that that word to abide still,
it means to continue with or to continue in.
It means to remain, tarry, or stay.
Now understand, and we'll look at this in greater detail
as we get through the remainder of the message this morning,
that the task that God has assigned to Timothy
is not really an easy task.
But even in the midst of a difficult task,
the charge is to continue to abide still.
Why?
Because God has a plan for your life.
Because God has equipped you his provision,
but also because God has a plan.
Listen, if we don't know what God's plan is,
it's likely that we're not gonna continue.
We're gonna flounder around, we're gonna falter,
we're gonna be easily derailed and distracted.
The enemy is going to have his way
because it's gonna be so easy to get us distracted
because we don't know the plan of God.
But if we know it, if we understand that God has a plan,
and the enemy tries to come and distract us
and to detour us, we can say, as Jesus said,
get thee behind me, Satan.
I know where I'm going.
I know what God's plan is for my life, amen?
And we find here that the task is revealed to us
and we understand that Timothy would be able to continue
with understanding that this was God's plan.
Notice as we look here at what it was
that Timothy was to do in Ephesus.
The Bible says that I besought thee to abide still
at Ephesus when I went into Macedonia.
So Paul went into Macedonia.
He besought Timothy to stay, to abide,
to continue at Ephesus, and here's what the task was,
that thou mightest charge some,
that they teach no other doctrine.
The task that is given, the plan for Timothy's life
is that he would charge some.
That word means to command or to order some,
and what is it specifically that he's commanding
or ordering, that they teach no other doctrine.
That's very interesting.
We've gotten three verses in the book of 1 Timothy
and we see the subject of doctrine appear
on the pages of Scripture.
Today we live in a time in which so many are saying,
in the broad term of Christendom today,
so many are saying, well, doctrine doesn't really matter.
Doctrine just divides and doctrine isn't really
that necessary and we can just kind of gravitate
to the couple of things that would cause us to have unity
and just kind of focus on those.
We all love God, don't we?
And the reality is that doctrine is important.
In fact, the subject of doctrine in 1 and 2 Timothy,
which is 10 chapters, the reference to the subject
of doctrine will be given 12 times in 10 chapters.
You think doctrine's important?
Absolutely doctrine's important.
We find that here, as we would understand the soundness
and the purity of doctrine that Paul says,
the plan that God has for you, Timothy,
as he's reminding him of why it was that he, Paul,
besought him, Timothy, to abide still at Ephesus
was that he might charge some
that they teach no other doctrine.
Paul said it this way in 2 Timothy 2 and verse number two,
as he would explain and expound the things
that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses,
the same commit thou to faithful men
who shall be able to teach others also.
We find that Paul would say to the believers in Philippi,
as he would give them instruction
with regard to even teaching truth,
he says in verse number nine of Philippians 4,
those things which ye have both learned and received
and heard and seen in me do,
and the God of peace shall be with you.
Listen, doctrine is important to God,
and here we find that Timothy,
the plan that God has for Timothy
is with regard to the soundness and the purity of doctrine,
and he says that you might charge some
that they teach no other doctrine.
Now, it's interesting,
the other doctrine or doctrines that we could look to
and see what's given in verse number four,
really in summary type of view,
notice he'll give further insight and discussion
as we move through these couple of letters
with regard to some of the false teaching,
but notice in verse number four, he says this,
neither give heed to fables and endless genealogies.
Then notice what he says,
which minister questions rather than godly edifying,
which is in faith, so do.
So really in verse number four,
we see these two categories, if you will.
We see one category of questions
and one category of godly edifying,
and we find that God reveals in verse number four
that questions are the result of fables
and endless genealogies.
That's the result, they're questions,
but he says that the result,
the product that we're looking for of godly edifying,
the way that you get there is through sound doctrine.
Sound doctrine.
We find that he says, which is in faith,
but notice in verse number two, at the end of the verse,
it says that if there be any other thing
that is contrary to sound doctrine,
and we find that throughout God's word
and throughout 1 and 2 Timothy,
there'll be number of references
to the importance of doctrine and sound doctrine,
and sound doctrine lends itself,
the product will be godly edifying.
But fables, fictions, and falsehoods,
and endless genealogies,
these are things that were very common
amongst Gnostic teaching,
we find that they would lead to questions
rather than godly edifying.
But understand with me,
as we know what Timothy was to do in Ephesus,
we know scripturally why Timothy was to do it.
Turn back to Acts chapter 20, if you will,
and I want you to see what happens in Acts chapter 20
that really gives us some insight.
regard to this plan that God has for the life of Timothy.
God's plan for Timothy is that he abides still at Ephesus, that he charge some that they
teach no other doctrine.
Why?
Because there are going to be some that begin to try to incorporate and teach, introduce
this false teaching, this other doctrine.
And Paul understands, as God has given his will, that Timothy is to abide there and he
is to charge some that they teach no other doctrine.
The soundness and purity of doctrine.
By the way, as we look here at Acts chapter 20, we're reminded that it's in Acts chapter
number 20 where Paul is speaking, as he's on the way to Jerusalem, to the church leaders
of the church at Ephesus.
That's who Paul is speaking to.
Why is it that we look to this passage of Scripture?
Well, because as we look to this passage of Scripture, we find in verse 17, the Bible
Now, we're not going to look at the entire charge that Paul gives to the elders of the
church at Ephesus, but we find that the connection that God gives us, as we interpret Scripture
with Scripture, is that Paul is speaking to the church leaders at Ephesus in Acts chapter
20, but it's in 1 Timothy 1 and verse number 3 that God says, through Paul,
when I went into Macedonia, that you might charge some that they teach no other doctrine.
Why is it?
Listen, God is a sovereign God.
God knows everything.
He has no beginning and no ending.
He is Alpha and Omega, and He knows all things, and we find that even as He would know and
He revealed that there would be false teachers that would creep in, God has the remedy.
What's the remedy?
I'm going to put you, Timothy, in this place so that you can stand and continue and give
truth with regard to sound doctrine.
Notice with me in Acts chapter 20 and verse number 29, Paul is finishing up his interaction
with the leaders of the church at Ephesus, and he's concluding this message to them,
and he's speaking to them about the importance of his ministry there and then charging them.
In fact, he speaks to them about feeding the flock of God.
In verse number 28, notice he says,
Take heed therefore unto yourselves and to all the flock over the which the Holy Ghost
hath made you overseers, to feed the church of God which he hath purchased with his own
blood.
How are they to feed?
Well, Peter speaks in 1 Peter chapter 5 about the elders that were to feed the flock of
God, were to give the truth and herald the word of God.
It's speaking about spiritual nourishment, not physical nourishment, and we find that
Paul says feed the church of God, but then notice in verse number 29,
For I know this.
This is interesting.
How does Paul know this?
Well, God revealed it to him.
And God revealed to him, Paul, what was going to happen in Ephesus, and he says,
I know this, that after my departing, notice, shall grievous wolves enter in among you,
not sparing the flock.
Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after
them.
So God revealed to Paul what was going to happen in Ephesus.
There are going to be some false teachers that are going to come in.
He refers to them in verse 29 as being grievous wolves, these false teachers.
These false teachers that would come in, they don't care about the flock.
They don't care about the sheep.
They only care about themselves.
They're there for filthy lucre.
They're there for their own advancement, for their own pride and what have you.
And we find that he says that these grievous wolves, they're going to enter in.
But then he says this in verse number 30, that also of your own selves shall men arise,
speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples, notice, after them.
No, it's not about what was going on in Corinth, that we have little sects of people that I'm
of Paul and I'm of Apollos and I'm of Cephas.
No, we're to be followers of the Lord Jesus Christ.
And we find that Paul was given the revelation from God and he gives the warning to the church
leaders at Ephesus.
What was the answer for the church leaders at Ephesus?
Teach them, feed them, give them truth because I know this is going to happen because God
has revealed it to us.
But then I want you to see what God does in his perfect plan.
In God's omniscient, he's the all-wise God.
He's got a perfect plan.
God, listen, Paul says, I know that after my departing, Paul's going to leave.
So what does he do?
Timothy's going to stay.
We read it in 1 Timothy chapter 1.
We've looked at it already.
But look at it again with me in verse number 3, as I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus.
Notice what he says, when I went unto Macedonia.
So Paul says, I know to the church leaders at Ephesus in Acts chapter number 20 that
after my departing, this is what's going to happen.
Why?
Because God's revealed it to me.
But I also want you to know that not only are you to feed the flock of God, but I'm
going to leave Timothy there.
Timothy, I'm beseeching, as I besought thee.
He's writing this in past tense of what God had placed in the life of Timothy as his
will.
He says, to abide still at Ephesus.
Why?
For thou hast charged some that they teach no other doctrine.
Listen, God is concerned about doctrine.
And God, in His infinite wisdom, He puts Timothy in this place.
And we find that God is graciously reminding Timothy through this portion of Scripture
as Paul is writing to him that God has a plan for your life.
And as we consider this morning, being equipped to continue, how is it?
I understand the importance of continuing.
In fact, I want to continue.
I don't want to be derailed.
I don't want to be detoured.
I want to finish strong.
I've got to be equipped.
And I believe that as we look at these four verses of Scripture this morning,
in 1 Timothy 1, verses 1 through 4, that God reveals these two fundamental truths
that if we could just grasp this morning and we could embrace these truths this morning,
it would enable each and every one of us to continue.
You have an enemy that wants to he wants to devour you.
But along the way, if he can't devour you, he wants to at least distract you.
He wants to derail you.
He wants to prevent you from finishing, from continuing.
He doesn't mind.
See, Paul says to the churches in Galatia, he said, you did run well.
Who did hinder you?
The enemy wants to hinder us.
You started out well, but you need to continue.
It's not how you start the race, it's how you finish the race.
I would say this morning that we ought to desire to start right and also finish right.
You say, pastor, I didn't start right.
Well, then at least finish right.
This morning, we see in the life of Timothy, he's the one that's being written to personally.
As we talk about the original recipient of these two letters of 1 and 2 Timothy,
he is the individual, the servant of the Lord, the child of God that's being addressed personally.
But God providentially preserved two letters that were written under the inspiration of
the Holy Spirit of God to a servant of the Lord, but he's preserved them for each of us.
No, I'm not Timothy and neither are you.
No, I'm not to abide at Ephesus and neither are you.
But we understand that as we look at the Scripture, as we look at God's Word,
that we can understand and apply truth for us today.
What is God's plan for your life?
If you sit there and say, I have no idea.
In fact, I didn't even know God had a plan for my life.
The likelihood of you continuing and finishing well is very low.
But I would say to you this morning that one of the ways that God equips us to continue
is by revealing to us His plan for our lives.
It's a precious truth that God has a plan for each and every one of us.
Now, as we consider the plan of God for our lives this morning,
we'd understand that there are a certain number of elements of God's plan for our
lives that are consistent for all of us.
It is God's will.
It is God's plan for your life that, and you begin to list things.
It's God's will for you to pray.
It's God's will for you to be in church.
It's God's will for you to give.
It's God's Word for you to testify and tell others about Christ.
We could speak about the things that are consistent,
that are general God's will for each and every one of us.
And we understand God has a plan.
But then we begin to look at our lives individually and say, God has a plan for me.
God has, God desires to use me in His work.
That's an amazing thought.
And when we understand that we are His workmen created in Christ Jesus,
and we're to walk and do good works, not to be saved or to stay saved,
but because we are saved and we understand that God has a plan for us,
God reveals, and I believe thus equips us to be able to continue.
Why?
Because we know that God has a plan.
But then we think about that first thought, that first truth, that fundamental truth.
truth that we began our study with this morning of God's provision. You know, I
find this morning that often we just can get weary in well-doing because we're
trying to do it in our own strength. We're trying to do it in our own power. We're
trying to to do the will of God. We understand that God has a plan and a
will for our lives, but maybe we're just going about it in our own strength.
Maybe we have forgotten the provision of God. We have forgotten that it's God
who is our Savior. It is God who said that He has given us eternal life and
will never perish. It's God who has said that that we're kept in His hand, that I
am His and He is mine. We have forgotten that He is our hope. Listen, there are a
lot of people today, I remember seeing different things over the years where
people would speak of something that happens in our nation and whether that's
a political thing or an economic thing or whatever it is and says, man, we now
have hope. No, our hope is in Jesus. He is my hope. I understand this year is an
election year. Listen, my hope is not in the election and if that offends you, I'm
sorry. Actually, I'm not sorry, Bart. He tells me not to apologize, but the
reality is you understand that's not my hope. My hope is Jesus. In fact, we sing
the song, my hope is Jesus, the anchor of my soul. Hallelujah. He gives hope, but He
is my hope. He gives grace. He gives grace. He enables us. He gives mercy and He
gives peace. Listen, in a world that's lost its mind, if we're going to continue,
we must understand the provision of God. God has given us all things that pertain
unto life and godliness. God has equipped us so that we can continue. Listen, if you
do not continue, you cannot charge God for your lack of continuing. It's not God's
fault because God's given us everything that we need to continue. Timothy could not
resign from the thing that God called him to do and say, well, it's God's fault. No, it's not
God's fault. It's your fault. I was reading this in my devotions this morning. I wasn't
going to deal with it, but I want to turn there in Exodus 18. It's a familiar portion
of Scripture for many of us. In Exodus 18, we find that Jethro, the father-in-law of
Moses, hears all that God did for Moses and for Israel. By the way, that's a lot. I won't
have time this morning to rehearse and recap what it is that God has done for Israel up
to this point as we come to Exodus 18, but we find all the plagues in Egypt and the deliverance
from Egypt and crossing the Red Sea and all that has taken place at this particular point.
In Exodus 18, we've seen the fact that there's bitter water at Marah. We find the provision
of manna in chapter 16. We find in chapter 17 the fact that there's no water at Meribah,
and we find that as we look at these things and we understand that God has done some amazing
things, and Jethro hears about it. There's some rejoicing that takes place. In fact,
the Bible starts in verse number 9 and says, and Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness which
the Lord had done to Israel. There was rejoicing going on, but then in the same text of Scripture,
Jethro observes some things that are taking place with regard to Moses. The Bible says
in verse 13, and it came to pass in the morrow that Moses sat to judge the people, and the
people stood by Moses. Notice what it says, from the morning unto the evening. And when
Moses' father-in-law saw all that he did to the people, he said, what is this thing that
thou doest to the people? Wise didst thou thyself alone, and all the people stand by
thee from morning unto evening. And Moses said to his father-in-law, because the people
come unto me to inquire of God, when they have a matter, they come unto me, and I judge
between one another, and I do make them know the statutes of God and His laws. Moses' father-in-law
said unto him, the thing that thou doest is not good. Notice what it says, thou wilt surely,
what's it say in your Bible, wear away, both thou and this people that is with thee. For
this thing, notice, is too heavy for thee. Thou art not able to perform it thyself alone.
Hearken now unto my voice, I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee. Be thou
for the people to Godward, that thou mayest bring the causes unto God. Thou shalt teach
them ordinances and laws, and shalt show them the way wherein they must walk, and the work
that they must do. Moreover, thou shalt provide out of all the people able men, such as fear
of God, men of truth, hating covetousness, and place such over them, to be rulers of
thousands and rulers of hundreds, rulers of fifties and rulers of tens. And let them judge
the people at all seasons, and it shall be that every great matter they shall bring unto
thee, but every small matter they shall judge, so shall it be easier for thyself, and they
shall bear the burden with thee. I meditated on this thought this morning from verse number
22. Easier isn't always a bad thing. Sometimes we think that life has to be really hard,
we've got to make it really hard to be godly. But here's what Jethro says, I believe it's
counsel from God by the way, he said it might be easier for thee. Not in the sense that
we're just looking for easy street and we don't want to do anything, but he says, remember,
thou shalt wear away. So I'm going to make it easier for you, then notice what it says
in verse 23, if thou shalt do this thing and God command thee so, then shalt thou
be able to, what does your Bible say? Endure. So I want you to draw the line, the connection
between verse number 18 when the Bible says thou will surely wear away, and in verse 23
when it says thou shalt be able to endure. What did God do? God gave some provision to
Moses. It's different provision that we look at in 1st Timothy 1, but we find that God
was providing Moses with that which he needed so that he could do, continue what he was
supposed to do. Listen, for each of us this morning, when we understand that God has a
plan for us, again, my plan and your plan are not the same exact, there's many things
that are consistent amongst it, but there are differences. I'm not going to, my plan
is not Moses' plan. My plan is not Timothy's plan. But we find this morning that God has
provided us with everything that we need so that we do not wear away, but so that we
endure, so that we continue. This morning, as we look at these introductory few verses
to 1st Timothy 1, we find that God gives us two fundamental truths that when understood
truly provide us with what we need so that we can understand that we have been equipped
to continue. It's His provision and it's His plan. And when we understand those things
by God's grace and with God's help because He provides it all for us, we will endure,
we will continue. It's one thing to understand the importance, the charge, the exhortation.
It's one thing to even accept the call. But if we try to do it in our own strength, if
we do it haphazardly without any real confidence, man, we're going to be easy prey for the enemy.
And so God says, understand that I have provided and understand that I have a plan for your
life. And when you understand those things, you are equipped to continue. Let's pray.
Father, we love You. We thank You for loving us. We thank You for Your Word, the truth
that's contained therein. God, I pray that You would help us this morning to understand
these fundamental truths contained within these few verses of Scripture. If we're going
to continue, we must recognize Your provision and Your plan for our lives. God, I pray this
morning that the Holy Spirit would take the Word of God, minister to each individual that's
here. Lord, maybe there's one that's not even sure of heaven. We sang about heaven. We spoke
about God being our Savior. Quite honestly, they do not know for sure that heaven is their
home. Lord, I pray that today they would understand that Your plan for their life, according to
1 Timothy 2, is that they would be saved. I pray that they would allow us to take a
Bible and show them, and they would bow their heart, Lord, to You, trust You as their personal
Lord and Savior. Lord, I think of the many saved people that are here this morning, Your
people. Lord, we face an enemy. We face great difficulty and opposition. But God, You've
equipped us to continue. You've given us all that we need. Your provision is abundant.
You're our Savior, our hope. You give grace, mercy, and peace. God, You have a plan for
us. And God, I pray that as we understand those two fundamental truths, that we would
be equipped to continue. Lord, I pray that if we've been trying in our own strength,
in our own power, Lord, that we'd just repent of that. We confess it as being sin and pride.
Lord, that we just trust You for Your enablement.
I pray that in these few moments of invitation, Lord, that You would have Your perfect will
and way in each and every individual that's present here this morning.
Lord, help us as we've been recipients of Your Word, now Lord, help us to respond and
to be doers of Your Word.
We'll thank You for every decision that's made, for it's in Christ's name we pray.
Would you stand with me?
Heads are bowed, eyes are closed.